Unit 8 The d- and f- Block Elements I. Answer the following questions. Each
  question carries one mark 1. Define transition elements. Ans. Transition
  element is defined as the one which has incompletely filled d orbitals in its
  ground state or in any one of its oxidation states. 2. What is the position of
  the d block elements in the periodic table? Ans. The d block elements are in
  the middle of s and p blocks, comprising the groups 3 to 12. They are the four
  rows of elements in the periods 4th (3d series), 5th (4d series), 6th ( 5d
  series) and 7th ( 6d series). 3. Zinc, cadmium and mercury of group 12 are not
  regarded as transition metals, Why ? Ans. Zinc, cadmium and mercury of group
  12 have full d10 configuration ( d orbitals are completely filled ) in their
  ground state as well as in their common oxidation states and hence, are not
  regarded as transition metals 5.Write the general electronic configuration of
  d block elements. Ans. [ Noble gas] (n-1)d1-10ns1-2 4. Why d- block elements
  are named as ‘transition elements ‘ ? Ans. The d–block elements occupies the
  middle of the periodic table and their properties are transitional between s–
  and p– block elements. 6. Write the general outer electronic configuration of
  d- block elements. . Ans. The general outer electronic configuration of d-
  block elements is (n-1)d1–10 ns1–2 7. Write the general electronic
  configuration of f- block elements. Ans. The general electronic configuration
  of f- block elements (Lanthanoids) is [Xe] 4f1 – 14 5d 0- 1 6s2 8.Name a
  member of the lanthanoid series which is well known to exhibit +4 oxidation
  state. Ans. Cerium 9. The outer electronic configuration of Cr is 3d5 4s1
  instead of 3d44s2, why? Ans. Half filled (3d5) orbitals are relatively more
  stable, hence one electron of 4s orbital jumps to 3d orbital. 10. The outer
  electronic configuration of Cu is 3d10 4s1 instead of 3d94s2 , why? Ans.
  Completely filled (3d10 ) orbitals are relatively more stable, hence one
  electron of 4s orbital jumps to 3d orbital. 11. Account for high melting point
  and boiling points of transition metals. Ans. The melting and boiling points
  of transition metals are high because of the involvement of greater number of
  electrons from (n-1)d orbitals in addition to the ns electrons in the inter
  atomic metallic bonding. 12.What is the trend in melting points of transition
  metals in a series? Ans.The melting points of the transition metals in a
  series rise to a maximum at the middle of the series (i.e. Cr or Mo or W -
  element with d 5 configuration ) and fall regularly as the atomic number
  increases. 13.Why do transition metals have higher enthalpies of atomization?
  Ans. Involvement of a large number of unpaired electrons of d orbitals favour
  stronger inter atomic interactions resulting in stronger bonds between the
  atoms of a metal and higher enthalpies of atomization. 14.Name one 3d series
  elements, that do not show variable oxidation states. Ans. Sc (+3) 16. Name 3d
  series metal which shows highest oxidation state. Ans. The highest oxidation
  state shown by 3d series transiNa tion metals is +7 by Mn 15.Transition metals
  exhibit variable oxidation states in its compounds, why? Ans. Transition
  metals exhibit variable oxidation states in its compounds due to the
  availability of both ns & (n – 1 ) d electrons for bond formation. 17. Name a
  metal in the 3d series of transition metals which exhibit +1 oxidation state
  most frequently. Ans. copper 18.What is the trend in oxidation state of
  transition metals ? Ans. The oxidation state increases with increase in atomic
  number & reaches a maximum in the middle and then decreases. 19. 3d series
  transition metals exhibit +2 as the most common oxidation state (except Sc)
  why? Ans. The +2 oxidation state, which commonly occurs for nearly all the
  transition metals is due to the loss of their outer 4s electrons 20. Why
  transition metals and their compounds shows paramagnetic behavior ? Ans. The
  transition metal ions are generally containing one or more unpaired electrons
  in them & hence their compounds are generally paramagnetic. 21. Name an of
  alloys of transition metals with non transition metals. Ans. Brass ( Cu & Zn)
  or Bronze ( Cu & Sn) 22.What is the action of neutral or faintly alkaline
  permanganate solution on iodide ? Ans. Alkaline permanganate solution oxidize
  iodide to iodate. 23. What happens when potassium permanganate is heated to
  513 K ? Ans. Potassium permanganate decomposes at 513K to potassium manganate,
  manganese dioxide and oxygen. 24. What is the principal oxidation state
  exhibited by the lanthanoids? Ans. The principal oxidation state of
  lanthanoids is +3. 25.Write the spin-only formula used to calculate the
  magnetic moment of metal ions. Ans. The magnetic moment is determined by using
  the spin only formula, where n is the number of unpaired electrons and μ is
  the magnetic moment in units of Bohr magneton (BM). 26. Why is Sc3+ (or Zn2+ )
  diamagnetic? Ans. Sc3+(Z=21) 3d0 no unpaired electron, n=0, μ=0. (or
  Zn2+(Z=30) 3d10 no unpaired electron, n=0, μ=0) 27. What is the most common
  oxidation state of lanthanoids and actionoids? Ans. The most common oxidation
  state of lanthanoids and actionoids is +3. 28.What is Actinoid contraction?
  Ans. There is a gradual decrease in the size of atoms or M3+ ions across the
  series. This is known as the actinoid contraction. 29.Actinoid contraction is
  more than lanthanoid contraction. Give reason. Ans. The actinoid contraction
  is, more than lanthanoid contraction due to poor shielding by 5f electrons
  from nuclear charge. 30. Actionoids show larger number of oxidation states
  than lanthanoids. Why? Ans. In actinoids 5f, 6d and 7s levels are of
  comparable energies ,hence electrons from these orbitals are available to lose
  or share. 31. Give one use of Mischmetall . Ans. Mischmetall is used in
  Mg-based alloy to produce bullets, shell and lighter flint. 32. Why transition
  metals forms alloys readily? Ans. Transition metals readily form alloys with
  other transition metals because of their similar radii 33. Give one use of
  transition metal alloy. Ans.Ferrous alloys containing chromium, vanadium,
  tungsten, molybdenum and manganese are used for the production of a variety of
  steels. II. Answer the following questions. Each question carries TWO marks.
  34. Name two characteristic properties exhibited by d – block elements due to
  their partly filled d orbitals. Ans. The characteristic properties exhibited
  by d – block elements due to their partly filled d orbitals are variable; (i)
  Oxidation states (ii) Formation of coloured ions. 35. Name two typical
  metallic properties displayed by transition elements. Ans.High tensile
  strength, ductility malleability, high thermal and electrical conductivity and
  metallic luster etc. 36. What are interstitial compounds? Give example. Ans.
  Interstitial compounds are those which are formed when small atoms like H, C
  or N are trapped inside the crystal lattices of transition metals. Example;
  TiC, Mn4N, Fe3H, VH0.56 and TiH1.7, etc. 37. Give any two physical
  characteristics of interstitial compounds. Ans.Two physical characteristics of
  interstitial compounds are: (i) They have high melting points, higher than
  those of pure metals. (ii) They are very hard and they retain metallic
  conductivity. 38.Calculate the ‘spin only’ magnetic moment of M2+ (aq) ion (Z
  = 27). Ans. M (z= 27 , 3d7 4s2)  M+2 (3d7 4s0) hence it has 3 unpaired
  electrons n= 3 = 3(3+2) = 3.87 BM 39. The second ionisation enthalpy is high
  for Cr and Cu , why? Ans: The second ionisation enthalpy is unusually high
  values for Cr and Cu because when M+ ion ionize to M+2 ion , the d5 and d10
  configurations of the M+ ions (i.e Cr+ or Cu+) are disrupted, with
  considerable loss of exchange energy . 40. Why first ionisation enthalpy of Cr
  is lower than that of Zn ? IE1 of Cr is lower, because removal of an electron
  from Cr does not change the d (3d5 4s1 to 3d5 4s0 ) configuration . Cr (z= 24
  , 3d5 4s1)  Cr+ (3d5 4s0) ------ IE1 +2 IE1 value for Zn is higher, because
  removal of electron from 4s level needs more energy. Zn (z= 30 , 3d10 4s2) 
  Zn+ (3d10 4s1) ------ IE1  IE1 (Zn) > IE1 (Cr) 41.Give two characteristics of
  transition metal alloys. . The alloys are hard and have high melting points.
  42.What is the action of heat on potassium permanganate ? Give equation. Ans.
  It decomposes at 513K to potassium manganate, manganese dioxide and oxygen.
  2KMnO4  K2MnO4 + MnO2 + O2 43. What is the action of neutral or faintly
  alkaline permanganate solution on iodide ?Give equation. Ans. Alkaline
  permanganate solution oxidize iodide to iodate. I- + 2MnO4- + H2O  IO3- +
  2MnO2 + 2OH- 44. Explain the oxidising action of acidified potassium
  dichromate on (iron(II) salts) Fe ions and write the ionic equations for the
  reaction. Ans. Acidified potassium dichromate oxidises iron(II) salts to
  iron(III). Cr2O7 2− + 14H+ + 6Fe2+ → 2Cr3+ + 6Fe3+ + 7H2O 45. The transition
  metals generally form coloured compounds, why? Ans. The compounds of
  transition elements shows colour due to presence of unpaired electron &
  ability to undergo d-d transition. When an electron from a lower energy d
  orbital is excited to a higher energy d orbital, the energy of excitation
  corresponds to the frequency of light absorbed. This frequency generally lies
  in the visible region. 46. Give reason “ transition metals and their many
  compounds acts as good catalysts”. Ans. Transition metals and their many
  compounds acts as good catalysts,it is due to (i) partially filled (n-1) d
  orbital (ii)variable oxidation state and provide a suitable surface for the
  reaction to take place. 47.Explain giving reason “transition metals form a
  large number of complex compounds”. Ans.Transition metals form a large number
  of (i) Small size & high charge density of complex compounds due to the ions
  of transition metals. (ii) presence of vacant d orbitals of suitable for bond
  formation. 48. What is the effect of increasing pH on a solution of potassium
  dichromate? Ans.On increasing the pH of the solution Potassium dichromate
  (orange) becomes potassium chromate (yellow) Cr2O7 2- + 2OH- → 2CrO4 2- + H2O
  49.What happens when H2S is passed into potassium dichromate in acidic medium?
  Give the equation. Ans. H2S gets oxidized to sulphur 2 S Cr2O7 −2 + 14H+ + 6e−
  → 2Cr+3 + 7H2O 3H → 6H+ + 3S + 6e− Cr2O7 −2 + 3H2S + 8H+ → 2Cr+3 + 7H2O + 3S
  50. What is ‘disproportionation’ of an oxidation state ? Give one example of
  disproportionation reaction in aqueous solution. Ans. A particular oxidation
  state , which is relatively less stable compared to other oxidation states ,
  under goes disproportion. Manganese (VI) which is relatively less stable
  changes over to manganese (VII) and manganese (IV) in acid solution. 3 MnO4-2
  + 4H+  MnO2 +2MnO4-+ 2 H2O 51. What is lanthanoid contraction? Write any one
  consequence of lanthanoid contraction. Ans. Steady decrease in the size of
  lanthanides with increase in atomic number is known as lanthanoid contraction.
  Due to lanthanoid contraction radii of members of 3rd transition series are
  very much similar to corresponding members of 2nd series. 52.Write any two
  consequences of lanthanoid contraction. Ans. Two consequences of lanthanoid
  contrations are (i) The radii of the members of the third transition series to
  be very similar to those of the corresponding members of the second series.
  Ex. The almost identical radii of Zr (160 pm) and Hf (159 pm) & Nb (146pm) &
  Ta (146pm) (ii) Difficulty in separation of lanthanoids due to similarity in
  chemical properties. 53. Name the two series of f-block. Ans. The f-block
  consists of the two series, lanthanoids (the fourteen elements following
  lanthanum) and actinoids (the fourteen elements following actinium. 54. The
  chemistry of actionoids is more complicated than lanthanoids. Why? Ans. The
  actinoids are radioactive elements having half lifes varying. Some members can
  be prepared only in nanogram quantities. These facts render their study more
  difficult. 55.Write two comparisons of variability in oxidation states of
  transition metals and non transition elements (p- block elements) ? Ans. 1. In
  transition elements , variable oxidation state differ from each other by
  unity, whereas in case of non transition elements , oxidation state differ by
  units of two.(For example Fe exhibits o.s of +2 and +3 . similarly copper
  exhibits two o.s of +1 and +2 . on the other hand, Sn, Pb exhibit o.s of +2
  and +4.) 2. In transition elements, higher o.s are more favoured in elements
  of higher atomic mass, whereas in p-block elements lower o.s are favoured by
  heavier members ( due to inert pair effect, For example Mo(VI) and W(VI) are
  more stable than Cr(VI). On the other hand Pb(II) is more stable than Sn(II))
  56. What happens when (a) A lanthonoid reacts with dilute acids ? (b) A
  lanthonoid reacts with water? Ans.(a) When lanthonoid reacts with dilute acids
  , it liberates hydrogen gas. (b)When lanthonoid reacts with water , it forms
  lanthanoid hydroxide and liberate hydrogen gas. 57. What is the gas liberated
  when i) crystals of potassium permanganate is heated to 513K ? ii) acidified
  potassium permanganate is treated with oxalate ion at 333K? Ans. i) When
  crystals of potassium permanganate is heated to 513K Oxygen (O2) gas is
  liberated . ii) Acidified potassium permanganate when treated with oxalate ion
  at 333K liberates Carbon dioxide (CO2) gas. 58. What is the composition of
  mischmetall? Give its one use. Ans. The composition of mischmetall is
  lanthanoid metal (~ 95%) and iron (~ 5%) and traces of S, C, Ca and Al.
  Mischmetall is used in Mg-based alloy to produce bullets, shell and lighter
  flint 59. Show the interconversion of chromate and dichromate The chromates
  and dichromates are interconvertible in aqueous solution depending upon pH of
  the solution. At pH less than 7: Chromate (yellow) on adding acid becomes
  dichromate (orange) 2CrO4 2- + 2H+ → Cr2O7 2- + H2O At pH more than 7 :
  Dichromate (orange) on adding base becomes Chromate (yellow) Cr2O7 2- + 2OH- →
  2CrO4 2- + H2O 60.How does the neutral or faintly alkalline potassium
  permanganate solution react with (a) Iodide (b) thiosulphite? Write the ionic
  equations for the reactions In neutral or faintly alkaline solutions: (a) The
  oxidation of iodide to iodate: 2MnO4 − + H2O + I− ——> 2MnO2 + 2OH− + IO3 − (b)
  Thiosulphate is oxidised almost quantitatively to sulphate: 8MnO4– + 3S2O3 2–
  + H2O ——> 8MnO2 + 6SO4 2– + 2OH– III. Answer the following questions. Each
  question carries THREE marks 61.Name the metal of the 1st row transition
  series that i) has highest value for magnetic moment ii) has zero spin only
  magnetic moment in its +2 oxidation state. iii) exhibit maximum number of
  oxidation states. Ans. i) Chromium ii) Zinc iii) Manganese 62.Transition
  metals form a large number of complex compounds.Give reason. Ans. Transition
  metals for complex compounds due to, i) small sizes of metal cations ii) their
  ionic charges and iii) availability of d orbitals for bond formation.
  63.Explain the trend in atomic size of 3d series of transition elements with
  reason. Ans. With increase in atomic number in 3d series - atomic size
  decreases (Sc to Cr) , then remain almost constant (Cr to Cu) and increase
  slightly at the end (Cu to Zn). Reason: In the beginning of the series the
  screening (or shielding effect) effect of a d electron is not that effective,
  hence the net electrostatic attraction between the nuclear charge and the
  outermost electron increases , hence atomic size radius decreases. In the
  middle of the series, increase in nuclear charge and increase in screening
  effect balance each other. So atomic radii become almost constant. Increase in
  atomic radii towards the end is due to the electro – electron repulsions
  causes the expansion of electron cloud. 64. Explain trend in Ionisation
  Enthalpies of 3d series of transition elements . Ans.Ionisation enthalpy
  increase along each series of the transition elements from left to right.
  However many small variations, IE of Chromium is lower because removal of an
  electron from Chromium does not change in the d (3d5 4s1 to 3d5 4s0 )
  configuration. I.E value for Zn (3d10 4s2) is higher because an electron is
  removed from 4s level which needs more energy. 65. How is potassium dichromate
  prepared from iron chromite ore? Ans.Potassium dichromate is manufactured from
  chromite ore (FeCr2O4). (i) Chromite ore is fused (FeCr2O4) with sodium or
  potassium carbonate in free access of air to get sodium chromate . 4FeCr2O4 +
  8Na2CO3 + 7O2 → 8Na2CrO4 + 2Fe2O3 + 8CO2 (ii) The yellow solution of sodium
  chromate is filtered and acidified with sulphuric acid to give a solution from
  which orange sodium dichromate, Na2Cr2O7. 2H2O can be crystallised. 2Na2CrO4 +
  2H+ → Na2Cr2O7 + 2Na+ + H2O Potassium dichromate prepared by treating the
  solution of sodium dichromate with potassium chloride. Na2Cr2O7 + 2KCl →
  K2Cr2O7 + 2NaCl Orange crystals of potassium dichromate crystallise out. 66.
  Describe the preparation of potassium permanganate from manganous dioxide.
  Potassium permanganate is prepared by fusion of MnO2 with an alkali metal
  hydroxide and an oxidising agent like KNO3. This produces the dark green
  K2MnO4 which disproportionates in a neutral or acidic solution to give
  permanganate. 2MnO2 + 4KOH + O2 → 2K2MnO4 + 2H2O 3MnO4 2– + 4H+ → 2MnO4– +
  MnO2 + 2H2O 67.How does the acidified permanganate solution react with (a)
  iron(II) ions (b) oxalic acid and (c) hydrogen sulphide ? Write the ionic
  equations for the reactions In acid solutions: (a) Fe2+ ion (green) is
  converted to Fe3+ (yellow): 5Fe2+ + MnO4– + 8H+ ——> Mn2+ + 4H2O + 5Fe3+ (b)
  Oxalate ion or oxalic acid is oxidised at 333 K: 5C2O4 2− + 2MnO4- + 16H+ ——>
  2Mn2+ + 8H2O + 10CO2 (c) Hydrogen sulphide is oxidised, sulphur being
  precipitated: H2S —> 2H+ + S2− 5S2− + 2MnO4 − + 16H+ ——> 2Mn2+ + 8H2O + 5S